Blog: Using Admission Controllers to Detect Container Drift at Runtime (#29761)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/TBD-admission-controllers-for-container-drift/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Using Admission Controllers to Detect Container Drift at Runtime"
date: TBD
slug: admission-controllers-for-container-drift
---

**Author:** Saifuding Diliyaer (Box)

> {{< figure src="intro-illustration.png" alt="Intro Illustration" width="75%" attr="Illustration by Munire Aireti" >}}

Reviewer: 1. alt attribute fix
2. Don't set styles. If the figure's not showing at the right size though we can separately PR a CSS fix. We haven't so far added a mechanism to size figures that aren't also diagrams.

```suggestion
{{< figure src="intro-illustration.png" alt="Introductory illustration" attr="Illustration by Munire Aireti" >}}
```

Author: Updated as suggested.

> At Box, we use Kubernetes (K8s) to manage hundreds of micro-services that enable Box to stream data at a petabyte scale. When it comes to the deployment process, we run [kube-applier](https://github.com/box/kube-applier) as part of the GitOps workflows with declarative configuration and automated deployment. Developers declare their K8s apps manifest into a Git repository that requires code reviews and automatic checks to pass, before any changes can get merged and applied inside our K8s clusters. With `kubectl exec` and other similar commands, however, developers are able to directly interact with running containers and alter them from their deployed state. This interaction could then subvert the change control and code review processes that are enforced in our CI/CD pipelines. Further, it allows such impacted containers to continue receiving traffic long term in production. To solve this problem, we developed an admission controller service called [kube-exec-controller](https://github.com/box/kube-exec-controller) along with its own kubectl plugin. They function together in detecting and terminating potentially mutated containers (caused by interactive kubectl commands), as well as revealing the interaction events directly to service owners for better visibility.

Reviewer: This might be a good place to link to a page about kubectl plugins, as it's the first mention.

> At Box, we use Kubernetes (K8s) to manage hundreds of micro-services that enable Box to stream data at a petabyte scale. When it comes to the deployment process, we run [kube-applier](https://github.com/box/kube-applier) as part of the GitOps workflows with declarative configuration and automated deployment. Developers declare their K8s apps manifest into a Git repository that requires code reviews and automatic checks to pass, before any changes can get merged and applied inside our K8s clusters. With `kubectl exec` and other similar commands, however, developers are able to directly interact with running containers and alter them from their deployed state. This interaction could then subvert the change control and code review processes that are enforced in our CI/CD pipelines. Further, it allows such impacted containers to continue receiving traffic long term in production. To solve this problem, we developed an admission controller service called [kube-exec-controller](https://github.com/box/kube-exec-controller) along with its own kubectl plugin. They function together in detecting and terminating potentially mutated containers (caused by interactive kubectl commands), as well as revealing the interaction events directly to service owners for better visibility.

Author: Updated based on the suggestion above.

## Admission control for interactive kubectl commands
Once a request is sent to K8s, it needs to be authenticated and authorized by the API server to proceed. Additionally, K8s has a separate layer of protection called [admission controllers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/), which can intercept the request before an object is persisted in *etcd*. There are various predefined admission controls compiled into the API server binary (e.g. ResourceQuota to enforce hard resource usage limits per namespace). Besides, there are two dynamic admission controls named [MutatingAdmissionWebhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#mutatingadmissionwebhook) and [ValidatingAdmissionWebhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#validatingadmissionwebhook), used for mutating or validating K8s requests respectively. The latter is what we adopted to detect container drift at runtime caused by interactive kubectl commands. This whole process can be divided into three steps as explained in detail below.

### 1. Admit interactive kubectl command requests

> First of all, we need to enable a validating webhook that sends qualified requests to our admission controller service. In the interest of interactive kubectl commands, we configure the webhook’s rules with resources as "[pods/exec, pods/attach]", and operations as “CONNECT”. They tell the K8s API server that all “exec” and "attach" requests should be subject to our admission controller service. We also specify a "service" reference (or "url" that gives the location of the webhook) and “caBundle” to provide its certificate, both under the “clientConfig” stanza. Here is a short example of what our ValidatingWebhookConfiguration object looks like:

Author: Updated based on the suggestion above.

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
metadata:
  name: example-validating-webhook-config
webhooks:
  - name: validate-pod-interaction.example.com
    sideEffects: None
    rules:
      - apiGroups: ["*"]
        apiVersions: ["*"]
        operations: ["CONNECT"]
        resources: ["pods/exec", "pods/attach"]
    failurePolicy: Fail
    clientConfig:
      service:
        name: example-service
        namespace: kube-exec-controller
        path: "/admit-pod-interaction"

>       caBundle: "{{CABUNDLE_VALUE}}"

Author: Added inline comments as suggested.

    admissionReviewVersions: ["v1", "v1beta1"]
```

> ### 2. Tag the pod with potentially mutated containers

Reviewer: Change “Tag” to “Annotate” and /r or “Label” depending on which is more appropriate.
For example:
```
### 2. Label and annotate the target pod
```

Author: Updated to `2. Label the target Pod with potentially mutated containers`

> Once a request of `kubectl exec` comes to our admission controller service, it tags the target pod by adding some customized K8s labels. In this way, we can not only query all the pods with potentially mutated containers, but also enable our service to retrieve previously identified pods in case itself gets restarted. The service cannot directly label the pod and return the updated object in its admission response. This is because the object stored in these admission requests is of type “PodExecOptions”, a child object of type “Pod”. As a result, there is a separate process in our admission controller service that patches the labels. The service returns an admission response as allowed after passing that pod reference to its K8s client, who is responsible for labeling and sending related K8s events to the target pod. Developers can check whether their pods are affected or not, simply by looking at its labels or running a `kubectl describe` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a request of `kubectl exec` comes to our admission controller service, the admission controller makes an internal note to label the associated Pod.The added labels mean that we can not only query all the pods with potentially mutated containers, but also enable the security mechanism to retrieve previously id. That labelling happens asynchronously. entified pods in case itself gets restarted.

The admission control cannot directly modify the targeted in its admission response. This is because the `pods/exec` request is against a subresource of the Pod API and the API kind for that subresource is `PodExecOptions`. As a result, there is a separate process in our admission controller code that patches the labels asynchronously. The admission controller allays permits the exec, then acts as a client of the Kubernetes API to label the target Pod and to log related events. Developers can check whether their pods are affected or not using `kubectl` or similar tools. For example:
```

Reviewer: (API design note: `box.com/podInitialInteractionTimestamp=1632524400`, `box.com/podInteractorUsername=username-1` and `box.com/podTTLDuration=1h0m0s` should ideally be _annotations_, and there should be a separate label to tell clients to look for those 3 annotations).

If these actually are annotations, let's make that clear.

Author: I think we specifically selected _labels_ here in our API design because all these values would be used to identify affected pods (e.g. filtered by given username, interaction start time, or TTL in different environments of clusters). [The K8s docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/) also seem to align with this kind of usage of _labels_:

> Labels are intended to be used to specify identifying attributes of objects that are meaningful and relevant to users... Non-identifying information should be recorded using annotations.

As pointed out by the doc above, we used _annotations_ for the non-identifying and mutable info (such as requested extension time from users). This also made our admission controller service easier when admitting pods' metadata change, as it doesn't allow any updates to the above _labels_ but supports updating the values of _annotations_.

Author: Addressed in [this commit](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/29761/commits/540390b811ac7f193b8cc62d71f4647db8999dd0).

```
$ kubectl get pod --show-labels
NAME      READY  STATUS   RESTARTS  AGE  LABELS
test-pod  1/1    Running  0         2s   box.com/podInitialInteractionTimestamp=1632524400,box.com/podInteractorUsername=username-1,box.com/podTTLDuration=1h0m0s

$ kubectl describe pod test-pod
...
Events:
Type       Reason            Age     From                            Message
----       ------            ----    ----                            -------
Warning    PodInteraction    5s      admission-controller-service    Pod was interacted with 'kubectl exec' command by user 'username-1' initially at time 2021-09-24 16:00:00 -0800 PST
Warning    PodInteraction    5s      admission-controller-service    Pod will be evicted at time 2021-09-24 17:00:00 -0800 PST (in about 1h0m0s).
```

### 3. Evict the target pod after a predefined period

> As you can see in the above event messages, the affected pod is not evicted immediately. At times, developers might have to get into their running containers necessarily for debugging some live issues. Therefore, we define a TTL of affected pods based on the environment of clusters they are running. In particular, we allow a longer time in our dev clusters as it is more common to run `kubectl exec` or other interactive commands for active development. While in prod clusters, there is a more limited time specified to avoid the affected pods serving traffic long term. The controller service internally sets a timer to each pod according to the given TTL duration. Once the timer is up, it will use the K8s Eviction API to restart the pod. The Eviction API ensures service availability since it respects the [PodDisruptionBudget](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/) (PDB) corresponding to the Deployment object. Let's say if a user has defined X number of pods as critical in their PDB object, the eviction process, requested by our admission controller service, will not continue when the Deployment has fewer than X pods running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 As you can see in the above event messages, the affected pod is not evicted immediately. At times, developers might have to get into their running containers necessarily for debugging some live issues. Therefore, we define a time to live (TTL) of affected pods based on the environment of clusters they are running. In particular, we allow a longer time in our dev clusters as it is more common to run `kubectl exec` or other interactive commands for active development.
 
For our production clusters, we specifc a lower time limit so as to avoid the affected pods serving traffic long term. The kube-exec-controller internally sets and tracks a timer for each pod that matches to the associated TTL. Once the timer is up, the kube-exec-controller evicts that Pod. Using Kubernetes API to request eviction ensures service availability, since the cluster respects any configured [PodDisruptionBudget](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/) (PDB) when performing the eviction. Let's say if a user has defined _x_ number of pods as critical in their PDB, the eviction (as requested by kube-exec-controller) does not continue when the target workload has fewer than _x_ pods running.
```

Author: Updated based on the suggestion above.

Here comes a sequence diagram of the entire workflow mentioned above: 

> {{< figure src="https://github.com/box/kube-exec-controller/raw/main/workflow-diagram.png" alt="Workflow Diagram" width="75%" >}}

Reviewer: If you could make this a SVG diagram, that'd be champion. Check out https://mermaidjs.github.io/ for one way to do that.

Reviewer: Also, change `width="75%"` to `class="diagram-medium"` or `class="diagram-large"`.

Reviewer: It doesn't have to be SVG format but we do strongly prefer that.

Author: Updated to SVG format and changed the attribute as suggested.

## A new kubectl plugin for better user experience

> Our admission controller service works great for solving the container drift issue we had on the platform. It is able able to submit all related K8s events to the target pod that has been affected. However, as K8s events often get away quickly (one hour of persistency by the default configuration), we need to provide other ways for developers to get their pod interaction activity. A [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) is a perfect choice for us to expose this information. We name our plugin “kubectl-pi” (short for pod-interaction) and provide two subcommands: “get” and “extend”. When the “get” command is called, the plugin simply checks the metadata attached by our admission controller service and transfers it to human-readable information. Here is an example output of the `kubectl pi get` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our admission controller component works great for solving the container drift issue we had on the platform. It is able able to submit all related Events that relate to the target pod that has been affected. However, Kubernetes clusters don't retain Events very log (the default retention period is one hour), we need to provide other ways for developers to get their pod interaction activity. A [kubectl plugin](/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) is a perfect choice for us to expose this information. We named our plugin `kubectl pi` (short for `pod-interaction`) and provide two subcommands: `get` and `extend`.

When the `get` subcommand is called, the plugin checks the metadata attached by our admission controller service and transfers it to human-readable information. Here is an example output from running `kubectl pi get`:
```

Author: Updated based on the suggestion above.

```
$ kubectl pi get test-pod
POD_NAME  INTERACTOR  POD_TTL  EXTENSION  EXTENSION_REQUESTER  EVICTION_TIME
test-pod  username-1  1h0m0s   /          /                    2021-09-24 17:00:00 -0800 PST
```

> The plugin can also be used to extend the current eviction time of a pod, in case developers need more buffer to debug ongoing issues after executing on their containers. This is achieved by the `kubectl pi extend` command, where the plugin patches relevant K8s annotation to the given pod. This annotation includes the duration and username who made the extension request for transparency (also displayed in the table returned from the “get” command). There is another webhook defined in our admission controller service that admits annotation updates and resets the eviction timer of the target pod accordingly. An example of requesting the extension from the developer side would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin can also be used to extend the TTL for a pod that is marked for future eviction. This is useful in case developers need extra time to debug ongoing issues. To achieve this, a developer uses the `kubectl pi extend` subcommand, where the plugin patches the relevant annotation for the given pod. This annotation includes the duration and username who made the extension request for transparency (also displayed in the table returned from the “get” command).

There is another webhook defined in kube-exec-controller. This webhook admits valid annotation updates; once aditted, those updates reset the eviction timer of the target pod accordingly. An example of requesting the extension from the developer side would be:
```

Author: Updated based on the suggestion above (with slight rephrasing).

```
$ kubectl pi extend test-pod --duration=30m
Successfully extended the termination time of pod/test-pod with a duration=30m
 
$ kubectl pi get test-pod

> POD_NAME  INTERACTOR  POD_TTL  EXTENSION  EXTENSION_REQUESTER  EVICTION_TIME

Reviewer: nit: these fields should be separated by `-` not `_`.

Author: Updated to `-` in the example output.

test-pod  username-1  1h0m0s   30m        username-2           2021-09-24 17:30:00 -0800 PST
```

## Future improvement

> Although our admission controller service works great in handling interactive requests to a pod, it could as well evict the pod while the actual commands are no-op in these requests. For instance, developers sometimes run `kubectl exec` merely to check their service logs stored on hosts. Nevertheless, the target pods would still get bounced despite the state of their containers not changing at all. One of the improvements here could be adding the ability to distinguish the commands that are passed to the interactive requests, so that no-op commands should not always force a pod eviction. However, this becomes challenging when developers get a shell to a running container and execute commands inside the shell, since they will not be visible to our admission controller service anymore.

Reviewer: This would be a good place to mention areas where the existing code deviates from good practice for extending Kubernetes (table headings in kubectl output, annotations vs. labels if the app code itself gets this wrong, anything else).

With a brief writeup of the gaps here, and fixes elsewhere, I think this'd be good to merge. To be clear, you don't need to fix kube-exec-controller - you just need to point out what you'd do differently if you were writing code that would become part of Kubernetes.

I think mentioning these gaps is important as we wouldn't want to publish this onto our official blog without pointing that out.

Author: @sftim Thanks for pointing this out.
For the "table headings in kubectl output," I have updated the example output in this blog post and also submitted a [PR](https://github.com/box/kube-exec-controller/pull/3) in the plugin source code repo to fix it. I believe we can get the PR merged before publishing this blog post (cc @FraBle).

For "annotations vs. labels," it was actually part of the initial design, and I have replied in one of your above comments with more detail. Please let me know if that makes sense to you. If so, I will leave this "future improvement" section as is. Thanks.

Reviewer: Thanks for the heading fix for the plugin.

On labels vs annotations I get why you'd want there to be _a_ label (for example, named `box.com/pod-time-to-live`), but not why (for example) `box.com/podInitialInteractionTimestamp` is a label and not an annotation. I can't see you querying for the value it has, and this would only ever be set in conjunction with the TTL label.

Author: @sftim No problem, glad to improve the plugin code to be more kubectl native.

I think what you said above on labels vs annotations makes sense, as we only used the `box.com/podInitialInteractionTimestamp` label to identify the affected pods but not actually querying for its value. 

I have updated this "Future improvement" section by mentioning the existing gaps to the ideal K8s design (in [this](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/29761/commits/540390b811ac7f193b8cc62d71f4647db8999dd0) latest commit).

## Summary

> With the power of admission controllers, we are able to secure our K8s clusters by detecting the pods with potentially mutated containers at runtime, and evicting them without affecting service availability. We also utilize kubectl plugins to provide flexibility of the eviction time and hence, bringing a better and more self-independent experience to service owners. We are proud to open-source the whole project for you to leverage in your own K8s clusters and welcome any contribution to help improve it together. This project is hosted on Github at https://github.com/box/kube-exec-controller

Reviewer: Capitalization nit: GitHub.

Author: Fixed.
